I'm a Senior Undergraduate in the Computer Science and Engineering Department
at IIT Delhi, advised by [Prof. Parag
Singla](https://www.cse.iitd.ac.in/~parags/) and [Prof.
Mausam](https://www.cse.iitd.ac.in/~mausam). I am also a [Reliance Foundation
Scholar](https://www.scholarships.reliancefoundation.org/) in Artificial
Intelligence and Computer Sciences. I was an SWE intern at
[Optiver](https://www.optiver.com/) last summer, and an Undergraduate Research
Assistant at the Neuroimaging Lab the summer before that.

Apart from this, I've been a volunteer teacher for NSS, an Academic Mentor for
MTL100, a runner-up in [Mimamsa 2021](http://mimamsa.iiserpune.ac.in/), a
journalist at [Board for Student Publications](https://www.bspiitd.com/), a
Representative for the [Quizzing Club](https://qciitdelhi.netlify.app/), and 
a BSW Student Mentor for freshers.

## Research Interests

My current research interests can be broadly divided into two:

**Reasoning in LLMs**: Constrained reasoning, guided decoding and mathematical
reasoning for large-language models.

**Neurosymbolic Reasoning**: Applying learning algorithms over object-centric representations of scenes rather than raw input, and extending this to unseen environments or improving reasoning of the environment as a consequence of this representation.

Apart from this, I'm also personally interested in the intersection of ML and
Systems: with the explosion of open-source LLMs and techniques for running them
locally on mobile devices, I hack around quite frequently with running
inference using them, or finetuning them.

**I would be applying for PhD/MS (Research) positions in the 2023-24 cycle**.
If you are accepting students and believe I would be a good fit, please do
reach out.

## Quizzing at IIT Delhi

Here are some links to sets that I've (co)hosted/conducted. Will be updated as I host more sets.

{{< project 
    title="Moonman" 
    link="https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1XUalDKMKswDNpj_mNbCHVfvIo9vbPt1iH0701RXrxN4/edit?usp=sharing"
    date="October 2022" >}}

A Music Video Quiz. I was bored of SciTech and wanted something different,
hence this quiz. First offline informal, which happened in the FACC room on a
rainy October night (don't ask why), and with cookies for most creative
incorrect answers :)

{{</ project >}}

{{< project 
    title="Rubik's Cube" 
    date="October 2021" >}}

[Prelims](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1rIlleNRHvl8Z24uw3gTFsqTQmoUvMOrDNA84sRUteWc/edit?usp=sharing) | [Finals](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1sd7JER8gDjK0jucvQCDSxBv5VkaCIZNg/view?usp=sharing)<br>
The first league quiz of the 2021-22 Season: Prelims are a standard slideshow,
whereas finals are the rendered slides from the final run of the program
(as such, they have two tiebreaker questions in orange and red)

{{</ project >}}

{{< project 
    title="Introduction to QC" 
    link="https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1OsX6UVhS4xcFVlPO4STaz1ZcmBbOMPjGTA4PlqCzJqA/edit?usp=sharing"
    date="January 2022" >}}

The usual pounce/bounce introduction to quizzing, complete with google traps.
The initial setup/team asssignment/rule explanation took around an hour, after
which the other questions (mostly taken from entropy) were run for people who
stayed late

{{</ project >}}

{{< project 
    title="Entropy: A Random Quiz" 
    link="https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1wZRMVul2y-17sAJJZraRxc9889y0ytnzBsj1DKDUXw8/edit?usp=sharing"
    date="March 2021" >}}

Entropy was the first quiz I conducted after entering IITD, and the only
fresher-hosted quiz in that year. We planned to host a prelims as well, but
didn't make it in time. Was a great experience, even though we hosted it
online.

{{</ project >}}

## Other Stuff

Some useful browser plugins to make the online sem easier: [Moodle Sidebar Plugin](https://github.com/Aniruddha-Deb/MoodleSidebarPlugin), [Impartus Ad Blocker](https://github.com/Aniruddha-Deb/ImpartusAdBlocker), [Impartus Participant Stats](https://github.com/Aniruddha-Deb/ImpartusParticipantStats), [Moodle Captcha Solver](https://github.com/Aniruddha-Deb/MoodleCaptchaSolver) (**EDIT**: Chrome is outlawing Manifest v2 to much furore, and I've officially migrated to using Firefox, along with all my plugins and scripts. You can find my UserScripts [here](https://github.com/Aniruddha-Deb/UserScripts))

[Course dependency graphs](http://localhost:1313/articles/2022/iit-course-planner-1/) for various programmes (I've been told this is what most people come here for :))

Fresher sem resources (IITD internal): [Sem 1](https://csciitd-my.sharepoint.com/:f:/g/personal/cs1200869_iitd_ac_in/Ej36n4LcTVFGnrAKpOw7i4AB1VrRvthe-TX8R4BNNRDRjw?e=Z0Edww) | [Sem 2](https://csciitd-my.sharepoint.com/:f:/g/personal/cs1200869_iitd_ac_in/EksZ_k43MuVOukNV7MAdnycBz_FINOik-uv_BC1uYP_t5Q?e=kdHDw4)

Other CS Sem Resources (IITD internal): [Sem 3](https://csciitd-my.sharepoint.com/:f:/g/personal/cs1200869_iitd_ac_in/EunTAZNCCG1DhPdfsdmwstoBxZ43PJOCP651mt3sKfKW7Q) | [Sem 4](https://csciitd-my.sharepoint.com/:f:/g/personal/cs1200869_iitd_ac_in/Er2_3xS_GX1Klx4pJde90awBJ8KfZ8RG7KvgYqk8-oQaPA?e=HuiIVS) | [Sem 5](https://csciitd-my.sharepoint.com/:f:/g/personal/cs1200869_iitd_ac_in/EngbL4fqiOFEmilT3Pu_EVEBxI2uWn657GCJJTRSZz9GQQ?e=aO0NpE) | [Sem 6](https://csciitd-my.sharepoint.com/:f:/g/personal/cs1200869_iitd_ac_in/EjHHwCa9tE9Enyg_ocwAkmIBRJnRD0SXNQU-LyCEf1SfWw?e=Ny8BgB)

For other useful IITD Websites, check out [Aditya Singh's Webpage](https://as1605.github.io/privateweb).

MTL106 Tutorial Solutions by Rishabh [here](https://fricai.github.io/mtl106/tutorial-solutions.pdf)

A few talks I've given: [Intro to Quant Finance](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1YvKM1ka1iktR0DxHXXzZ23IacFJ7gV5h/view?usp=drive_link), [T distributions](https://github.com/Aniruddha-Deb/back_to_normal), [Cellular Automata](https://github.com/Aniruddha-Deb/automata-talk)
